---
layout: post
title:  "Programming a GH60 on Linux"
date:   2018-10-22 15:07:19
categories: [tutorial]
comments: true
share: true
---

I recently wanted to update my keyboards layout and thought it was a good opportunity to come with a guide since many friends keep asking me how to flash their keyboard on Linux. In this case I am requiring an Atmel-based PCB as we’re using DFU-Programmer which is developed for Atmel-Microcontrollers. But there is a good chance, that you have one in your keyboard as well since they are the most popular manufacturer for micro controllers.

Install prerequisites:

``` shell
sudo pacman -S python python-pip python-wxpython  dfu-programmer
```
First of all we need to come up with our layout, which we use easykeymap.sh from the EasyAVR package for. It also generates a .hex file which we later use for flashing. In order to run easykeymap.sh we need to clone the project from GitLab.

``` shell
git clone https://gitlab.com/ChuckN408/EasyAVR.git && cd EasyAVR
sudo ./easykeymap.sh
```

Firstly you need to create a new layout file and select your board accordingly. In my case it’s a GH60. There is also an option that lets you roughly determine the keyboard layout. In my case I selected ISO here as it’s the standard here in Europe. Now you can either further modify your selected layout in `easykeymapper` itself or use one from an external source. For example you can generate layout files online by using the [keyboard-layout-editor(https://keyboard-layout-editor.com).

To map the keys select the key you want to remap and click on the white rectangle beneath the scan code in the context menu. Now a virtual keyboard assists you in finding the correct key. In order to use function layers, you need to define a key as `Fn1`, `Fn0` will not work. If you finished your layout you can go ahead and save it now in .json format for later modifications.

Now you need to export the `.hex` file, that we will going to flash on to the keyboards microcontroller. To program your board you can either choose the “Build & Program” option or use `dfu-programmer` manually. I prefer the by hand method for security reasons since it doesn’t require you to open `easykeymapper` as `root` user. But keep in mind that you first need to put your board into boot mode by either pressing a reset button at the back of your PCB or use a predefined boot button.

The programming steps are as follows. If you’re board uses a different microntroller than the atmega32u4 simply replace the name. But keep in mind you need to use a second keyboard to enter the commands. Alternatively you can use a [script](https://gist.github.com/alexanderstephan/655e9fc4ab07f268af271c4084c19fef) as well.

Using the script:

``` shell
wget https://gist.githubusercontent.com/alexanderstephan/655e9fc4ab07f268af271c4084c19fef/raw/bee744308b81e524557fde6ad2890ba4a74414da/gh60.sh -O gh60.sh
chmod +x gh60.sh
sudo ./gh60.sh
```
Or just do it manually, if you only do it once in a while.

``` shell
dfu-programmer atmega32u4 erase --suppress-validation
dfu-programmer atmega32u4 flash <filename>.hex
```
